<pre>
DIP: 69
Layer: Consensus (soft fork)
Title: OP_CHECKZKP - Native Zero-Knowledge Proof Verification
Author: Hanzhi Liu <hanzhi@riema.xyz>
        Hongbo Wen <hongbo@riema.xyz>
        Yu Feng <yu@riema.xyz>
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 2025-04-08
</pre>

== Abstract ==

This DIP introduces <code>OP_CHECKZKP</code> as a new opcode in Dogecoin's scripting language, enabling native on-chain verification of zero-knowledge proofs (ZKPs). Initially supporting Groth16 proofs on the BLS12-381 curve, the opcode design includes an extensible mode selector to accommodate future proof systems (e.g., PLONK). <code>OP_CHECKZKP</code> reuses the existing unused opcode <code>OP_NOP10</code> (185).

== Motivation ==

Dogecoin's scripting language currently cannot efficiently verify general computations, limiting its ability to support complex contracts or trustless scaling solutions. Zero-knowledge proof systems (zk-SNARKs) offer a way to prove the correctness of arbitrary off-chain computations in a succinct proof that is fast to verify on-chain. By adding a native ZKP verification opcode, Dogecoin can enable zk-rollups and other Layer-2 protocols that vastly increase throughput without increasing on-chain load.

Another motivation is trustless scalability. Dogecoin targets high throughput (e.g., 1-minute blocks). However, scaling by naive methods (like big blocks or on-chain compute) risks centralization or orphaned blocks. ZKPs allow scaling by moving computation off-chain while the chain only does a constant amount of work per transaction (verifying a succinct proof). This means Dogecoin can handle dramatically more activity (DeFi, games, etc.) with minimal impact on node performance​.

Importantly, this approach maintains a separation of concerns: we are not introducing a general VM or Turing-complete script (which would be a radical change to Dogecoin's model). Instead, we add a single, narrowly-scoped verification tool. The heavy lifting of computation is done off-chain by provers; on-chain we only verify. This keeps the consensus rules simple and auditable – Dogecoin nodes don't need to understand the details of every computaion, only how to verify the proofs. The opcode is modular so that new cryptographic proof systems can be integrated over time without redesigning the Script system. By supporting an extensible "mode" for different proof types, we future-proof the design and encourage experimentation with improved ZKP techniques as they mature. Finally, there is demonstrated interest and prior work in bringing zkSNARKs to UTXO chains. A recent community proposal (<code>OP_CHECKGROTH16VERIFY</code> by QED) showed how Groth16 proofs could be verified on Dogecoin as a soft fork​. We generalize and formalize it and incorporate lessons learned (such as extensibility to proofs beyond Groth16 and careful resource limits).

In summary, <code>OP_CHECKZKP</code> will allow Dogecoin to support trustless zk-rollups, verifiable computation, and more complex smart contract logic with a minimal, opt-in consensus change.

== Specification ==

=== Opcode Redefinition ===

<code>OP_CHECKZKP</code> redefines opcode <code>185 (0xB9)</code> previously designated as <code>OP_NOP10</code>. Older Dogecoin nodes interpret this opcode as <code>OP_NOP</code> and thus remain compatible.

After activation, any occurrence of byte <code>0xB9</code> in a script will invoke ZKP verification semantics as described below. Legacy behavior was to treat it as a no-op; new behavior will conditionally invalidate the script if a proof check fails, otherwise acting as a no-op (leaving the stack unchanged). Thus, <code>OP_CHECKZKP</code> "marks the transaction as invalid if the proof is incorrect, otherwise script evaluation continues as though an OP_NOP was executed".

=== Modes and Stack Layout ===

<code>OP_CHECKZKP</code> consumes a variable number of stack items, determined by a mode parameter which indicates the proof system (and verification mode) in use. The mode is given by a small integer pushed onto the stack immediately before the opcode. The opcode does not consume (pop) any of its inputs when successful – it only reads them – in order to remain soft-fork compatible (older nodes see no stack change). If verification succeeds, all inputs remain on the stack (so script authors should remove them with drops afterward); if verification fails, the opcode terminates the script with an error. In pseudocode, it behaves roughly as:

* '''Mode 0:''' Groth16 on BLS12-381
* '''Mode 1:''' Reserved for future PLONK support (no implementation required now)

=== Mode 0 (Groth16 on BLS12-381) Stack Layout ===

In this mode, the opcode verifies a Groth16 proof with exactly 2 public inputs, given an explicit verifying key. All necessary data is pushed onto the stack in a specific order before calling the opcode. If the proof does not validate against the given verifying key and inputs, the script fails. If it validates, the script continues (with all data still on stack). The stack format is:

<pre>
<π_A_x>            (48-byte proof element, G1 affine x-coordinate)
<π_A_y>            (48-byte proof element, G1 affine y-coordinate)
<π_B_x_0>, <π_B_x_1>  (each 48-byte, proof element π_B in G2, x-coordinate in Fp2 split into two 48-byte values)
<π_B_y_0>, <π_B_y_1>  (each 48-byte, proof element π_B in G2, y-coordinate split into two values)
<π_C_x>            (48-byte proof element, G1 affine x-coordinate)
<π_C_y>            (48-byte proof element, G1 affine y-coordinate)
<public input 0>   (32-byte public input value)
<public input 1>   (32-byte public input value)
<verifier data 0>  (80-byte chunk of the verifying key data)
<verifier data 1>  (80-byte chunk of verifying key)
<verifier data 2>  (80-byte chunk of verifying key)
<verifier data 3>  (80-byte chunk of verifying key)
<verifier data 4>  (80-byte chunk of verifying key)
<verifier data 5>  (80-byte chunk of verifying key)   – (Total verifier key here is 480 bytes split in 6 pushes)
OP_0               (Mode 0 indicator, pushed as 0x00)
OP_CHECKZKP
</pre>

== Reference Implementation ==

<source lang="cpp">
enum ZKPMode : uint32_t { GROTH16 = 0 };

case OP_ZKPVERIFY:
{
    // Ensure at least mode present
    if (stack.size() < 1) {
        return set_error(serror, SCRIPT_ERR_INVALID_STACK_OPERATION);
    }
    // Peek mode (do not pop, to leave stack unchanged on success)
    valtype vchMode = stacktop(-1);
    uint32_t mode = 0;
    if (!CastTo32BitUnsigned(vchMode, mode)) {
        return set_error(serror, SCRIPT_ERR_UNKNOWN_ZKP_MODE);
    }
    if (mode == ZKPMode::GROTH16) {
        // Required stack items:
        size_t proofItems = 8;        // π_A, π_B (split), π_C
        size_t publicInputs = 2;    // number of public inputs provided
        size_t vkChunks = 6;
        size_t totalNeeded = proofItems + publicInputs + vkChunks + 1; // +1 for mode itself
        if (stack.size() < totalNeeded) {
            return set_error(serror, SCRIPT_ERR_INVALID_STACK_OPERATION);
        }
        // Gather proof data
        CGroth16Proof proof;
        proof.A.x = stacktop(-1 - (1) - (0 + vkChunks + publicInputs));
        proof.A.y = stacktop(-1 - (1) - (0 + vkChunks + publicInputs) + 1);
        proof.B.x0 = stacktop(-1 - (1) - (0 + vkChunks + publicInputs) + 2);
        proof.B.x1 = stacktop(-1 - (1) - (0 + vkChunks + publicInputs) + 3);
        proof.B.y0 = stacktop(-1 - (1) - (0 + vkChunks + publicInputs) + 4);
        proof.B.y1 = stacktop(-1 - (1) - (0 + vkChunks + publicInputs) + 5);
        proof.C.x = stacktop(-1 - (1) - (0 + vkChunks + publicInputs) + 6);
        proof.C.y = stacktop(-1 - (1) - (0 + vkChunks + publicInputs) + 7);
        // Gather public inputs
        std::vector<uint8_t> pub0 = stacktop(-1 - (1) - (vkChunks));      // first public input (32 bytes)
        std::vector<uint8_t> pub1 = stacktop(-1 - (1) - (vkChunks) - 1);  // second public input (32 bytes)
        // Gather verifier key
        Groth16VerifyingKey vk;
        vk.data[0] = stacktop(-1 - 1 - (vkChunks-1));
        vk.data[1] = stacktop(-1 - 1 - (vkChunks-2));
        vk.data[2] = stacktop(-1 - 1 - (vkChunks-3));
        vk.data[3] = stacktop(-1 - 1 - (vkChunks-4));
        vk.data[4] = stacktop(-1 - 1 - (vkChunks-5));
        vk.data[5] = stacktop(-1 - 1 - (vkChunks-6));
        // Perform verification (calls into ZKP library)
        if (!Groth16_Verify(proof, vk, {pub0, pub1})) {
            return set_error(serror, SCRIPT_ERR_ZKP_VERIFY_FAILED);
        }
        // If we reach here, proof is valid. Do NOT pop anything (leave stack intact).
        return true;
    } else {
        // Unknown mode
        return set_error(serror, SCRIPT_ERR_UNKNOWN_ZKP_MODE);
    }
}
</source>

== Rationale ==

Dogecoin scripts currently lack the ability to verify zero-knowledge proofs (ZKPs), significantly limiting their potential to enable advanced features like privacy-preserving transactions and scalable layer-2 solutions such as zk-rollups. Earlier proposals were rigid and tightly coupled specific proof systems (e.g., Groth16) into opcodes, hindering future-proofing and flexibility.

Introducing <code>OP_CHECKZKP</code> addresses these limitations by:

* Implementing a clear mode selector to decouple verification logic from specific proof systems and other scripting functionalities.
* Allowing straightforward and modular upgrades to support additional proof systems in the future without requiring new opcodes, thus maintaining script readability and simplicity.
* Utilizing an existing unused opcode (<code>OP_NOP10</code>) to ensure seamless soft-fork integration and compatibility with legacy nodes.

== Backwards Compatibility ==

This proposal constitutes a fully backward-compatible soft fork:

* Older Dogecoin nodes interpret the newly introduced <code>OP_CHECKZKP</code> opcode as an existing no-operation (<code>OP_NOP</code>), ensuring that legacy nodes remain unaffected and continue to validate blocks correctly.
* Existing scripts remain entirely unaffected as they do not utilize the previously unused opcode.

== Security and Performance ==

=== Denial-of-Service Considerations ===

'''Validation cost:''' Verifying a zk-SNARK is computationally heavier than typical script operations like hashing or signature checking. We must ensure this doesn't open a DoS vector where an attacker can slow down block verification or clog up nodes by including many expensive verifications. Groth16 verification involves a few Miller loops and final exponentiation (for pairings); on modern CPUs, this is on the order of a couple milliseconds per proof (roughly 2-10ms depending on optimization and hardware). Actual benchmarks on an Intel i7 show BLS12-381 pairings can be done in ~4–8ms each; Groth16 needs 3 pairings + some multiples, say ~10-20ms total. Even assuming ~20ms per proof on modest hardware, an attacker would have to include dozens of proofs per block to noticeably delay block validation.

The size of each proof+vk is large (~0.9 KB as noted). This inherently limits how many can fit in a block of given size. For example, if Dogecoin's block size is 1 MB (1,000 KB), you could fit at most about 1000 proofs of 1 KB each (in practice less, because transactions have other data). At 20ms each, 1000 proofs would take 20 seconds to verify, which would be problematic given 60s block interval (that's 33% of the time just verifying proofs). However, 1000 such proofs cannot realistically fit because the transactions carrying them also have overhead (inputs/outputs, etc.), and miners likely wouldn't fill an entire block with just ZKP spends as it would delay propagation and risk their block being orphaned. A more realistic worst-case: maybe 500 proofs in a block (~500 KB of just proofs) which ~10s verification – still high.

'''Memory usage:''' Each proof verification will allocate some memory for curve computations, but nothing huge (a few big integers, etc.). Even 1000 proofs would allocate at most tens of MB in total temporarily, which is fine. The verifying keys being repeated in each input could be heavy (480 bytes each copy). There is an opportunity for optimization: if many inputs use the same verifying key (same circuit, different proofs), the node could cache the parsed verifying key to avoid re-parsing it each time. However, implementing such caching in consensus code is complex and not typically done (each input is verified independently).

To be safe, we can introduce policy limits: restrict standard transactions to at most one <code>OP_CHECKZKP</code> per script and and a maximum of 5 such transactions per block. These numbers can be adjusted.

=== Benchmarks ===

To evaluate the performance and security impact of introducing <code>OP_CHECKZKP</code> to Dogecoin Script, we outline a benchmarking plan. This plan is divided into two components: (1) '''baseline protocol-level benchmarks''' that measure system-wide performance under ZKP usage, and (2) '''ZKP-specific workload benchmarks''' inspired by best practices from other chains (e.g., Ethereum's adoption of zero-knowledge precompiles).

These benchmarks aim to inform the community and core developers of any practical trade-offs introduced by this soft fork, and to ensure the opcode performs safely under normal and adversarial workloads.

==== 1. Protocol-Level Performance Benchmarks ====

These tests use established Dogecoin benchmarking methodologies. They characterize <code>OP_CHECKZKP</code> performance in terms of block validation time, mempool behavior, and consensus edge cases.

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Test Name
! Description
! Metric(s) Collected
! Notes
|-
| '''Block Validation Time'''
| Measure time to validate blocks with 0–N ZKP verifications
| Total block processing time (ms)
| Compare baseline vs. ZKP-heavy blocks
|-
| '''Mempool Stress Test'''
| Fill the mempool with transactions using ZKPs
| Mempool size, eviction rate
| Near-full mempool conditions
|-
| '''Reorg Revalidation'''
| Trigger a chain reorganization involving 100+ ZKP verifications
| Revalidation time (ms), orphan rate
| Test in offline vs. sync mode
|}

''Placeholder for Results Table''

''These will be populated after implementation testing.''

==== 2. ZKP-Specific Workload Benchmarks ====

To assess zero-knowledge proof verification in Dogecoin Script, we design targeted micro- and macro-benchmarks. These evaluate <code>OP_CHECKZKP</code> under common ZKP use cases (e.g., zk-rollups) and stress conditions.

===== 2.1 Single-Proof Verification Benchmark =====
* '''Objective''': Measure the time and memory required to verify a single Groth16 proof on BLS12-381.
* '''Setup''': Execute a script containing one <code>OP_CHECKZKP</code> (Mode 0 stack layout).
* '''Metrics''': Execution time (ms), peak memory (MB).
* '''Test Platforms''':  
** Intel i7: [TBD] ms, [TBD] MB
** M1 Mac: [TBD] ms, [TBD] MB
** Raspberry Pi 5: [TBD] ms, [TBD] MB

===== 2.2 Multi-Proof Block Benchmark =====
* '''Objective''': Analyze the impact of verifying many proofs (e.g., 5–500) in one block.
* '''Setup''': Simulate blocks filled with transactions each containing an <code>OP_CHECKZKP</code> verification.
* '''Metrics''': Total block validation time, average per-proof time (ms), full node CPU%, peak RAM usage.
* '''Results (to be collected)''':

{| class="wikitable"
|-
! Proofs
! Total Time (ms)
! Avg Per-Proof (ms)
! CPU Usage (%)
! RAM (MB)
|-
| 5
| 
| 
| 
| 
|-
| 10
| 
| 
| 
| 
|-
| 50
| 
| 
| 
| 
|-
| 100
| 
| 
| 
| 
|}

===== 2.3 Verifying Key Reuse Benchmark =====
* '''Objective''': Quantify the cost difference between reusing a verifier key vs. parsing a new key for each proof.
* '''Setup''': Verify the same proof repeatedly using the same verifying key versus using unique keys each time.
* '''Metrics''': Total validation time, verifier key parse time (ms), memory usage.
* '''Scenarios''':  
** With key reuse:  [TBD]
** Without reuse:  [TBD]

===== 2.4 Propagation & Orphan Risk Test =====
* '''Objective''': Assess latency and fork/orphan risk when blocks contain a high density of ZKP verifications.
* '''Setup''': On the Dogecoin testnet, broadcast blocks packed with <code>OP_CHECKZKP</code> transactions.
* '''Metrics''': Gossip propagation delay (ms), orphan block rate, miner selection latency.
* '''Observations''':  
** Average propagation:  [TBD]
** Orphan frequency (out of 5 trials):  [TBD]

===== 2.5 Policy Compliance Testing =====
* '''Objective''': Test the enforcement of proposed soft policy limits (e.g., 1 <code>OP_CHECKZKP</code> per transaction, 5 per block).
* '''Setup''': Generate transactions and blocks that intentionally violate the ZKP-count policy limits.
* '''Metrics''': Rejection rate of non-compliant transactions, correctness of mempool acceptance (no false accepts).
* '''Outcomes''':  
** Violations correctly rejected:  [TBD]
** False negatives (violations accepted):  [TBD]

''Note: Detailed benchmarks will be added after implementation and testing.''

== Future Extensions ==

* Mode <code>1</code> explicitly reserves future support for the PLONK proof system or other emerging zero-knowledge protocols. If/when we add mode 1 (PLONK), we have to consider its performance. PLONK proofs verify with a few elliptic curve multiplications and FFTs – typically faster than Groth16's pairings or similar order. So adding PLONK likely wouldn't be worse for DoS (perhaps even better in verification time, though proof size is bigger meaning fewer can fit per block). Each new proof system will require its own resource analysis. Possibly we might assign a different "cost weight" to each mode if needed. For now, with only Groth16, a uniform approach is fine.
* Additional modes and extensions can be introduced through future proposals, leveraging the designed extensibility of the opcode.